Chosen topic: Universal Basic Income

Research should be boiled down to 2-3 key points in lieu of numerous AI-assisted ideas

It can be said that the people that desire something the most are the ones that such programs/subsidies are tailored to. For instance, the Universal Basic Income proposal has not been put into action yet; such a “liberal fantasy” is mainly directed towards those without jobs or susceptible to losing their jobs, especially in the midst of rising AI automation in the workplace.
The creative medium I would like to use to convey my gathered ideas is through a journal/diary.
People of many, if not all, backgrounds/professions have spoken up—whether it be from recent times or far back into the past, about raising concerns in the rising wave of AI. Workers of various fields of interest, stationed at companies once fully operated by its own workforce composed of collective human effort and due diligence, have since been on the receiving end of displacement from or replacement of the employees’ jobs in question. Universal basic income comes into play in the midst of weighing many different facets and taking what we would like to think are well-informed approaches. 
From an analytical standpoint, levying higher taxes (especially for high tax brackets) isn’t likely.
Much like how artificial intelligence was jokingly proposed long ago to be able to evolve into something too dangerous to contain, universal basic income has also been hailed as a sort of “utopian,” if you will, method of stabilizing the job market alongside the broader economy (as a whole) of societies across the globe. Now, both concepts are not only realizing ever so quickly, individuals are also realizing that the contrasting programs must complement each other in moving forward and making progress. 
When put together, AI and what it entails for the future can be deemed as a trailblazer. At the same time, those that may stand in the way of it all cannot become sitting ducks that are trampled over.


Rudimentary information was from:

https://thehill.com/opinion/finance/5713876-ai-displacement-and-ubi/

https://finance.yahoo.com/news/musk-fantasy-future-where-optional-090200145.html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAFeDUP_bblQCNzHIaM0aJm78I-TD3wTJsvgtpdLbhWy7XFy3WRZ84uJi2Rrr_GX1Lfj4rrQsm6gCCmW8oNpf2T-DrlMChQv4xS5wn7swhc-9jehc4V6A4jMx4jS25jQxjzcud2Y3AVw9vM8LBye8AQ3q1gtfFS9OA9J11kIzMvCC

https://ideas.repec.org/a/kap/decono/v173y2025i1d10.1007_s10645-024-09447-1.html

https://www.un.org/en/un-chronicle/rethinking-universal-basic-income-economic-productivity-quality-life-and-sustainable

https://hai.stanford.edu/news/a-new-economic-world-order-may-be-based-on-sovereign-ai-and-midsized-nation-alliances

https://www.britannica.com/procon/universal-basic-income-UBI-debate

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/mar/06/utopian-thinking-poverty-universal-basic-income


Journey Back Up:

Day 1: Public announcement of Universal Basic Income (UBI) program by the Canadian federal government

Dear Diary,

I hate to start off on a note completely different from the nature of this entry's title, but I have just been laid off. I don't know about you, but two days have never felt so long. The last thing on my bucket list was to update the headline of my LinkedIn profile to include the abbreviation: prev.
To be frank, I am very unsure about what is to come in terms of financial aid; the government here in Montreal city of Québec has been rather optimistic. Though, I guess when compared to my own prevailing, despairing feelings: anything can be said to be upbeat and promising. In four days, the Federal Government of Canada—which is based in Ottawa (quite close to where I am at geographically), will actualize & implement the unconditional severance pay for AI-affected job titles, effective immediately.
Over these few days, I plan to reflect more on my own disposition (being displaced caused underlying thoughts and feelings to shine through what was once an unhealthy, bottled up mess).


Day 2: “Due for a change” can be meant for both yours truly and the job market in its current state

Dear Diary,

I think I speak for many when I say that Einstein was right. Time is NOT the same for everyone. When I find myself in times of trouble at work, everything seems to happen in slow motion. Yet, staying at home as I currently am doing has proved to be a breeze. A calming breeze in a raging storm, that is. 
The situation that I’m in the dead center of really is nice to experience for a change.
As I wait for a steady stream of income to start flowing into my savings account from time to time, preoccupying myself is easy. I distract myself from all the hardship that has been going on by playing computer games and watching TV shows. While this is good for the mental, I know that I must continue to apply myself in sharpening my skills even though AI seems to do it effortlessly. That is truly my only hope of ever getting into a blue-chip company ever again in my short-lived career as of now.
If I were to say so myself, these times feel like when I was in my college days. Working part-time co-ops and studying were both for prospective learning instead of direct earnings. You could say that I was more focused on outcome instead of income.
Now that your correspondent is back to square one, the yearning that I once had for employment opportunities that I can actually grasp and grapple with are stronger than ever. Back then, my worry was that my naivety and lack of work experience would render me without a job. Concurrently, the caveat right now is that artificial intelligence capabilities are beyond that of many workers. 
Cheap code, cheat code (am I right?).


Day 3: It is a bear market out there, and so please bear with me

Dear Diary,

Today was not much of an exciting day. It’s starting to feel as though going to the office is endearing and amusing now.
One would probably think that my sleep schedule would be in order and “fixed,” given the time that I have on my hands to adjust said Circadian rhythm. You would be incorrect. The times that I sleep and wake up at are more unstable than the currently manned, dispensable jobs in Silicon Valley.
Boredom is honestly getting the better of me which is not referring to much. I busy my mind with trudging through Cloud certification courses including but not limited to: Amazon Web Services (AWS) Training and Google Cloud Platform (GCP).
That being said, I will now relax and watch some comedies to inspire these written pieces further. At this point, I am the only one who finds these funny because of my lack of humor! Then again, this is an expression of my state of mind and beliefs, nagging at the back of my mind; I don’t particularly mean for this to be seen by many others, per se.


Day 4: Fired? Fired up

As you may have noticed, it is February 14, 2026! It is a special day for many and for many reasons. For some, it is a celebration of admiration and appreciation for those around the aforementioned people. And for me, this momentous day will be remembered in hindsight also because it serves as the transition between having not much wiggle room for cash flow and receiving an influx of passive income.
My then-colleagues from TeachTech Inc. that I still stay in contact with have also been ecstatic in unison with yours truly! I can safely say that I am happier than ever (ever since being fired).


Day 5: Layoffs and Playoffs

The universal basic income (UBI) program that Canada has projected to commence is finally in action! However, that is not the only hot topic on this occasion . . .
Canada has been making strides in AI and, now, ice hockey. At the Milano Cortina 2026, our nation has been going at it and fighting as hard as ever. Players are putting their best selves and pulling better and better tactics from up their sleeves, all taking place on the rink.
In terms of spectators, we continue to worry not only about the ongoing game and whether we will take back the qualifying win but also about the slippery slope of the present-day job market and how everyone will find their footing.
Friends and family members are also tuned into the televised matches and making sure that their close ones are healthy and happy in tough times! 
The turmoil that the surge of artificial intelligence automation has unfortunately caused severe and widespread job losses in the technology sector/industry, if that was not made clear before.
What has also helped many is the start of reimbursement distribution, given unconditionally to affected Canadian businessmen and workers alike. Finally, people are beginning to receive money for their hard work that was suddenly and rudely cut off & interrupted by the AI takeover.


Day 6: Receiving end

Dear Diary,

Recipients of the federal UBI program that Canada has begun to incite on displaced workers have been informed that this will not last forever. I mean, what were we expecting? The money is coming from either out-of-pocket sources or taxpayers’ dollars, if not a mix of both. Anyone with a sensical thought process would know that such a fairytale initiative would not last very long! This being said, I do not understand at all the outrage that has been going on online, especially since the system has just enacted these streams of income to families and individuals!
In order to remain optimistic and positive, we must uphold gratefulness and solidarity—namely, deftly utilising the capital we have obtained to re-invest in not only stocks but also ourselves. Such a practical and pragmatic avenue will lead to discovering new jobs and stable livelihoods for all!
Cash is seemingly falling from the sky. It isn’t much to ask to recognize that things, in complicated times, are simply looking up!


Sources used exclusively apart from research:

https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/our-long-lost-sense-urgency-theory-relativity-samer-saab

https://www.youtube.com/shorts/2Xo6O3BMqJY